Walk I'm back in the last video we ask the question is there a better way to find a number in a sorted
list and just for this example let's add an extra number to our list.
That's better.
Let's say I was looking for 34 and I knew that my list let's say array was sorted.
What's a better way to go about it instead of checking every single item one by one from left to right.
Well we can use something called binary search because we know the list is sorted.
We can discard half the items instead of one at a time.
Let me show you we can start in the middle of the list and say is 9.
Higher or lower than 34 wall 34 is higher than 9 so let's discard everything to the left of it.
And then we go to the middle index again.
In this case there's no technically a medium.
So let's just choose 12.
Go to the left of the media is 12 higher lower than 34.
While it's definitely lower So let's remove everything to the left of it.
And then let's find the middle index and oh we just found 34 instead of going through the item one by
one.
We did that in three operations.
And this looks familiar.
Right.
And it's something we learned about when we talked about trees specifically binary search trees because
if our data is sorted we can do better than O oven or linear time because this sorted list might remind
you of something we're essentially creating a binary search tree unlike linear search we can discard
half the items instead of one at a time and you might be thinking well that's ridiculous Andre because
in order for us to even searches we have to sort the list first and that takes computational power.
Right.
But storing data in a data structure like a tree instead of a linear data structure like an array is
actually more efficient.
And this is something we've already discussed with tree data structures as we insert items if we sort
them.
It actually gives us better performance then adding it to an on sorted list that we have to search through
one day and because in a tree where we make a decision Should we go left or right.
Should we go left or right and we discard half the items every step this should trigger something in
your brain saying oh this is a divide and conquer approach which gives us a log of and time because
log then comes from the fact that we're now visiting all nodes each step down the tree we're eliminating
nodes.
So this is the deal with binary search you split a list over sorted item and decide from there whether
item you're looking for is in the left or the right of the list.
And because the list is sorted you can make that decision very easily.
But just comparing things.
And we just keep going until we find what we want in this case.
Number 34 we make 1 2 3 decisions.
And this makes sense because if you're a teacher that's looking at a stack of essays and papers by students
if their stack of paper is not organized then you have to go through it one by one to find.
Let's say Timmy.
But if the stack of paper is sorted alphabetically then you can find me by dividing the papers half
each time until you get to temi.
Just like a phone book.
We start with an element then when we step down we have an divide by two elements remaining.
And as we step down we have and divided by four elements remaining and we keep going keep going keep
going until we find our element.
And in the sorting section we learn that merge sort and quicksort are doing the same thing.
And we also learned how to actually search through this tree in our data structure section rate with
linear search.
We had four loops with a binary search tree like this one.
Well we had our lockup method where we checked the left node and the right node and divided up the list
using a while loop in half each time.
So we know how to do linear search and binary search.
We know that binary search is going to be log of and time complexity versus linear search which is 0
of and but what are these two well up until this point we've talked about when we're searching for an
item where we know that 34 exists.
Our list is sorted in a binary search tree and we know where to go left or right but sometimes we have
to do something called traversals and traversals simply means.
Well going from no to node either finding a specific thing or making sure that you touch every single
node perhaps we don't want to add a color attribute to each note here.
Perhaps we want to update these numbers and multiply them by two.
In that case we have to visit every single note.
How do we do that.
Let's find out in the next video.